What if Age Is Nothing but a Mind-Set?
One day in the fall of 1981, eight men in their 70s stepped out of a van in front of a converted monastery in New Hampshire. They shuffled forward, a few of them arthritically stooped, a couple with canes. Then they passed through the door and entered a time warp. Perry Como crooned on a vintage radio. Ed Sullivan welcomed guests on a black-and-white TV. Everything inside — including the books on the shelves and the magazines lying around — were designed to conjure 1959. This was to be the men’s home for five days as they participated in a radical experiment, cooked up by a young psychologist named Ellen Langer.
The subjects were in good health, but aging had left its mark. “This was before 75 was the new 55,” says Langer, who is 67 and the longest-serving professor of psychology at Harvard. Before arriving, the men were assessed on such measures as dexterity, grip strength, flexibility, hearing and vision, memory and cognition — probably the closest things the gerontologists of the time could come to the testable biomarkers of age. Langer predicted the numbers would be quite different after five days, when the subjects emerged from what was to be a fairly intense psychological intervention.
Langer had already undertaken a couple of studies involving elderly patients. In one, she found that nursing-home residents who had exhibited early stages of memory loss were able to do better on memory tests when they were given incentives to remember — showing that in many cases, indifference was being mistaken for brain deterioration. In another, now considered a classic of social psychology, Langer gave houseplants to two groups of nursing-home residents. She told one group that they were responsible for keeping the plant alive and that they could also make choices about their schedules during the day. She told the other group that the staff would care for the plants, and they were not given any choice in their schedules. Eighteen months later, twice as many subjects in the plant-caring, decision-making group were still alive than in the control group.
To Langer, this was evidence that the biomedical model of the day — that the mind and the body are on separate tracks — was wrongheaded. The belief was that “the only way to get sick is through the introduction of a pathogen, and the only way to get well is to get rid of it,” she said, when we met at her office in Cambridge in December. She came to think that what people needed to heal themselves was a psychological “prime” — something that triggered the body to take curative measures all by itself. Gathering the older men together in New Hampshire, for what she would later refer to as a counterclockwise study, would be a way to test this premise.
The men in the experimental group were told not merely to reminisce about this earlier era, but to inhabit it — to “make a psychological attempt to be the person they were 22 years ago,” she told me. “We have good reason to believe that if you are successful at this,” Langer told the men, “you will feel as you did in 1959.” From the time they walked through the doors, they were treated as if they were younger. The men were told that they would have to take their belongings upstairs themselves, even if they had to do it one shirt at a time.
Each day, as they discussed sports (Johnny Unitas and Wilt Chamberlain) or “current” events (the first U.S. satellite launch) or dissected the movie they just watched (“Anatomy of a Murder,” with Jimmy Stewart), they spoke about these late-'50s artifacts and events in the present tense — one of Langer’s chief priming strategies. Nothing — no mirrors, no modern-day clothing, no photos except portraits of their much younger selves — spoiled the illusion that they had shaken off 22 years.
At the end of their stay, the men were tested again. On several measures, they outperformed a control group that came earlier to the monastery but didn’t imagine themselves back into the skin of their younger selves, though they were encouraged to reminisce. They were suppler, showed greater manual dexterity and sat taller — just as Langer had guessed. Perhaps most improbable, their sight improved. Independent judges said they looked younger. The experimental subjects, Langer told me, had “put their mind in an earlier time,” and their bodies went along for the ride.
The results were almost too good. They beggared belief. “It sounded like Lourdes,” Langer said. Though she and her students would write up the experiment for a chapter in a book for Oxford University Press called “Higher Stages of Human Development,” they left out a lot of the tantalizing color — like the spontaneous touch-football game that erupted between heretofore creaky seniors as they waited for the bus back to Cambridge. And Langer never sent it out to the journals. She suspected it would be rejected.
After all, it was a small-sample study, conducted over a mere five days, with plenty of potentially confounding variables in the design. (Perhaps the stimulating novelty of the whole setup or wanting to try extra hard to please the testers explained some of the great improvement.) But more fundamental, the unconventionality of the study made Langer self-conscious about showing it around. “It was just too different from anything that was being done in the field as I understood it,” she said. “You have to appreciate, people weren’t talking about mind-body medicine,” she said.
Langer did not try to replicate the study — mostly because it was so complicated and expensive; every time she thought about trying it again, she talked herself out of it. Then in 2010, the BBC broadcast a recreation, which Langer consulted on, called “The Young Ones,” with six aging former celebrities as guinea pigs.
The stars were squired via period cars to a country house meticulously retrofitted to 1975, right down to the kitschy wall art. They emerged after a week as apparently rejuvenated as Langer’s septuagenarians in New Hampshire, showing marked improvement on the test measures. One, who had rolled up in a wheelchair, walked out with a cane. Another, who couldn’t even put his socks on unassisted at the start, hosted the final evening’s dinner party, gliding around with purpose and vim. The others walked taller and indeed seemed to look younger. They had been pulled out of mothballs and made to feel important again, and perhaps, Langer later mused, that rekindling of their egos was central to the reclamation of their bodies.
The program, which was shown in four parts and nominated for a Bafta Award (a British Emmy), brought new attention to Langer’s work. Jeffrey Rediger, a psychiatrist and the medical and clinical director of Harvard’s McLean Hospital, was invited by a friend of Langer’s to watch it with some colleagues last year. Rediger was aware of Langer’s original New Hampshire study, but the made-for-TV version brought its tantalizing implications to life.
“She’s one of the people at Harvard who really gets it,” Rediger told me. “That health and illness are much more rooted in our minds and in our hearts and how we experience ourselves in the world than our models even begin to understand.”
Langer’s house in Cambridge was as chilly as a meat locker when we arrived together, having walked from campus, last winter. The back door had been left open all day so that her aging, coddled Westie, Gus, could relieve himself in the yard. (Langer’s partner, Nancy Hemenway, who normally would be at home, was away.) Gus has a brain tumor. “He was supposed to be dead over a year ago,” Langer said. “But I think he might outlive us all.”
In the kitchen, Langer began laying out wide noodles for a lasagna she was making for an end-of-term party. It was the last time she would meet with her students for a while; they were about to scatter for the winter break, and she was leaving for a sabbatical in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where she and Nancy have another home. (Langer planned to Skype into weekly lab meetings.)
“Family recipe?” I asked of the dinner.
“I don’t follow recipes — you should know that,” she said. She piled on an immoderate amount of cheese. “Besides, if I blow it, what’s going to be the cost?” Langer said. “Is it anyone’s last meal?” She added, “My students aren’t going to love me if my lasagna’s no good?”
Langer was born in the Bronx and went to N.Y.U., becoming a chemistry major with her eye on med school. That all changed after she took Psych 101. Her professor was Philip Zimbardo, who would later go to Stanford and investigate the effects of authority and obedience in his well-known prison experiment. Human behavior, as Zimbardo presented it, was more interesting than what she’d been studying, and Langer soon switched tracks.
She went on to graduate work at Yale, where a poker game led to her doctoral dissertation on the magical thinking of otherwise logical people. Even smart people fall prey to an “illusion of control” over chance events, Langer concluded. We aren’t really very rational creatures. Our cognitive biases routinely steer us wrong. Langer’s notion that people are trained not to think and are thus extremely vulnerable to right-sounding but actually wrong notions prefigured many of the tenets of “behavioral economics” and the work of people like Daniel Kahneman, who won a Nobel Prize in economic sciences. But unlike many researchers who systematically work out one concept until they own it, Langer’s peripatetic mind quickly moved on to other areas of inquiry. “I was never — and maybe this is a character flaw — the type of person who is going to take one idea and beat it to death,” she said. “Part of that is that I have so many ideas. If whatever it is I’m excited about now doesn’t happen, it doesn’t matter, because there’s always the next possibility.”
Continue reading the main story
By the 1970s, Langer had become convinced that not only are most people led astray by their biases, but they are also spectacularly inattentive to what’s going on around them. “They’re just not there,” as she puts it. When you’re not there, Langer reasoned, you’re very likely to end up where you’re led. She set up a number of studies to show how people’s thinking and behavior can easily be manipulated with subtle primes.
In one, she and her colleagues found that office workers were far more likely to comply with a ridiculous interdepartmental memo if it looked like other official memos. In another, created with her Yale mentor, Robert Abelson, they asked behavioral and traditional therapists to watch a video of a person being interviewed, who was labeled either “patient” or “job applicant,” and then evaluate the person. The behavioral therapists regarded the interviewee as well adjusted regardless of whether they were told the person was a patient or an applicant. But the traditional therapists found the interviewee labeled “patient” significantly more disturbed. Even trained observers “were mindlessly led by the label,” Langer says.
If people could learn to be mindful and always perceive the choices available to them, Langer says, they would fulfill their potential and improve their health. Langer’s technique of achieving a state of mindfulness is different from the one often utilized in Eastern “mindfulness meditation” — nonjudgmental awareness of the thoughts and feelings drifting through your mind — that is everywhere today. Her emphasis is on noticing moment-to-moment changes around you, from the differences in the face of your spouse across the breakfast table to the variability of your asthma symptoms. When we are “actively making new distinctions, rather than relying on habitual” categorizations, we’re alive; and when we’re alive, we can improve. Indeed, “well-being and enhanced performance” were Langer’s goals from the beginning of her career.
Martin Seligman in the past two decades has come to be recognized as the father of positive psychology. Tal Ben-Shahar, who taught a popular undergraduate course at Harvard on the subject until 2008, calls Langer “the mother of positive psychology,” by virtue of her early work that anticipated the field.
Langer came to believe that one way to enhance well-being was to use all sorts of placebos. Placebos aren’t just sugar pills disguised as medicine, though that’s the literal definition; they are any intervention, benign but believed by the recipient to be potent, that produces measurable physiological changes. Placebo effects are a striking phenomenon and still not all that well understood. Entire fields like psychoneuroimmunology and psychoendocrinology have emerged to investigate the relationship between psychological and physiological processes. Neuroscientists are charting what’s going on in the brain when expectations alone reduce pain or relieve Parkinson’s symptoms. More traditionally minded health researchers acknowledge the role of placebo effects and account for them in their experiments. But Langer goes well beyond that. She thinks they’re huge — so huge that in many cases they may actually be the main factor producing the results.
Continue reading the main story
As an example, she points to a study she conducted in a hair salon in 2009. She got the idea from a study undertaken nearly a decade earlier by three scientists who looked at more than 4,000 subjects over two decades and found that men who were bald when they joined the study were more likely to develop prostate cancer than men who kept their hair. The researchers couldn’t be sure what explained the link, though they suspected that androgens (male hormones including testosterone) could be affecting both scalp and prostate. Langer had another theory: “Baldness is a cue for old age,” she says. “Therefore, men who go bald early in life may perceive themselves as older and may consequently be expected to age more quickly.” And those expectations may actually lead them to experience the effects of aging. To explore this relationship between expectations of aging and physiological signs of health, Langer and her colleagues designed the hair-salon study. They had research assistants approach 47 women, ranging in age from 27 to 83, who were about to have their hair cut, colored or both. They took blood-pressure readings. After the subjects’ hair was done, they filled out a questionnaire about how they felt they looked, and their blood pressure was taken again. In a paper published in 2010 in the journal Perspectives on Psychological Science, they reported that the subjects who perceived themselves as looking younger after the makeover experienced a drop in blood pressure.
A few years earlier, Langer and one of her students, Alia Crum, conducted a study, published in the journal Psychological Science, involving 84 hotel chambermaids. The maids had mostly reported that they didn’t get much exercise in a typical week. The researchers primed the experimental group to think differently about their work by informing them that cleaning rooms was fairly serious exercise — as much if not more than the surgeon general recommends. Once their expectations were shifted, those maids lost weight, relative to a control group (and also improved on other measures like body mass index and hip-to-waist ratio). All other factors were held constant. The only difference was the change in mind-set.
Critics hunted for other explanations — statistical errors or subtle behavior changes in the weight-loss group that Langer hadn’t accounted for. Otherwise the outcome seemed to defy physics. “To which I would say, ‘There’s no discipline that is complete,’ ” Langer responds. “If current-day physics can’t explain these things, maybe there are changes that need to be made in physics.”
In the course of her career, Langer says, she has written or co-written more than 200 studies, and she continues to churn out research at a striking pace. Just before winter break, in her final meeting with two dozen or so students and postdocs, Langer went around the table checking the progress of nearly 30 experiments, all of which manipulated subjects’ perceptions. Some used a special clock that could be set to run at half-speed or double-speed. In one study, sleeping subjects were fooled, upon awakening, into thinking they had more or less sleep than they actually did. She posits that the scores on measures of short-term memory and reaction time will vary accordingly, regardless of how long the subjects actually slept. In a yet-to-be-published diabetes study, Langer wondered whether the biochemistry of Type 2 diabetics could be manipulated by the same psychological intervention — the subjects’ perception of how much time had passed. Her theory was that the diabetics’ blood-glucose levels would follow perceived time rather than actual time; in other words, they would spike and dip when the subjects expected them to. And that’s what her data revealed. When a student emailed her with the results this fall, she could barely contain her excitement. “This is the beginning of a psychological cure for diabetes!” she told me.
Some of the new experiments rely on variables that change self-perception. In a study using avatars, scheduled to take place at the popular gaming facility Second Life, subjects will watch a digital version of themselves playing tennis and gradually getting thinner from the exertion. Langer is exploring whether watching an avatar will have a physiological effect on the real person. “You see yourself, you’re playing tennis,” Langer said. “The question is: Will people lose weight? We’ll see.”
Some of Langer’s colleagues in the academy see her as a valuable force in psychology, praising her eccentric intelligence and ingenious study designs. Steven Pinker, the writer and Harvard professor, told me that she filled an important niche within the school’s department, which has often harbored “mavericks with nontraditional projects,” including “B. F. Skinner’s utopian novels and manifestoes and Herb Kelman’s encounter groups between Arab and Israeli activists — not to mention Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert,” who would become Ram Dass.
But Langer’s sensibility can feel at odds with the rigors of contemporary academia. Sometimes she will give equal weight to casually hatched ideas and peer-reviewed studies. She spoke loosely to me of her New Hampshire counterclockwise study as having been “replicated” three times — in Britain, the Netherlands and South Korea. But none of these were lab experiments. They were events made for television. The study that arguably made Langer’s name — the plant study with nursing-home patients — wouldn’t have “much credibility today, nor would it meet the tightened standards of rigor,” says James Coyne, professor emeritus of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania medical school and a widely published bird dog of pseudoscience. (Though, as Coyne also acknowledges, “that is true of much of the work of the ’70s, including my own concerning depressed persons depressing others.”) Langer’s long-term contributions, Coyne says, “will be seen in terms of the thinking and experimenting they encouraged.”
Four years ago, Langer and her colleagues published in Psychological Science a study that came closest in spirit to the original counterclockwise study in New Hampshire. Here, too, the placebo was a health prime, a situational nudge. They had two groups of subjects go into a flight simulator. One group was told to think of themselves as Air Force pilots and given flight suits to wear while guiding a simulated flight. The other group was told that the simulator was broken and that they should just pretend to fly a plane. Afterward, they gave each group an eyesight test. The group that piloted the flight performed 40 percent better than the other group. Clearly “mind-set manipulation can counteract presumed physiological limits,” Langer said. If a certain kind of prompt could change vision, Langer thought, there was no reason, that you couldn’t try almost anything. The endgame, she has said many times since, is to “return the control of our health back to ourselves.”
Continue reading the main story
Last spring, Langer and a postdoctoral researcher, Deborah Phillips, were chatting when the subject of the counterclockwise study came up. Over the more than 30 intervening years, Langer had explored many dimensions of health psychology and tested the power of the mind to ease various afflictions. Perhaps it was finally time to run the counterclockwise study again. But if they did, she wanted to raise the stakes: Could they shrink the tumors of cancer patients? Langer often says she has no clue where her ideas come from — but in this case it was crystal clear: Metastatic breast cancer killed her mother at 56, when Langer was 29.
Phillips suggested that perhaps they should start with early-stage cancers, ones perceived as more curable, but Langer was firm: It had to be a big, common killer that traditional Western medicine had no answer for. She settled on Stage 4 metastatic breast cancer. Treatment of such cases is usually framed in terms of so-called comfort care. “The medical world has given up on these people,” Langer says.
The study, which is planned for the spring, is designed to include three groups of 24 women with Stage 4 breast cancer who are in stable condition and undergoing hormonal therapy. Two groups will gather at resorts in San Miguel de Allende, Mexico, under the supervision of Langer and her staff. The experimental group will live for a week in surroundings that evoke 2003, a date when all the women were healthy and hopeful, living without a mortal threat hanging over them. They will be told to try to inhabit their former selves. Few clues of the present day will be visible inside the resorts or, for that matter, outside them. In the living areas, turn-of-the-millennium magazines will be lying around, as will DVDs of films like “Titanic” and “The Big Lebowski.” San Miguel de Allende, which has historically been a place known for its nearby healing mineral springs, is a Unesco World Heritage Site, and many of its buildings look as they did a few hundred years ago. “The whole town is a time capsule,” Langer says. (The other group at San Miguel will have the support of fellow cancer patients but will not live in the past; a third group will not experience any research intervention.)
As with the original counterclockwise experiment, subjects will be tested before and after on relevant measures — in this case the size of their tumors and the levels of circulating proteins in their blood known to be made by cancer cells — in addition to variables like mood and energy and pain levels. The experimental group will bring with them the same kinds of primes that the New Hampshire men did, like photographs of their younger selves. “We won’t make them haul their bags up the stairs,” Langer says. But otherwise they will be nudged to do all they can for themselves.
Continue reading the main story
The staff will encourage the women to think anew about their circumstances in an attempt to purge any negative messages they have absorbed during their passage through in the medical system. This is crucial, Langer says, because just as the mind can make things better, it can also make things worse. The nocebo effect is the flip side of the more positive placebo effect, and she says that one of the most pernicious nocebo effects can occur when a patient is informed by her doctor that she is ill. The diagnosis itself, Langer says, primes the symptoms the patient expects to feel. “You change a word here or there, and you get vastly different results,” Langer says. She told me about a yet-to-be-published study she did in 2010 that found that breast-cancer survivors who described themselves as “in remission” were less functional and showed poorer general health and more pain than subjects who considered themselves “cured.”
Continue reading the main story
So there will be no talk of cancer “victims,” nor anyone “fighting” a “chronic” disease. “When you’re saying ‘fighting,’ you’re already acknowledging the adversary is very powerful,” Langer says. " ‘Chronic’ is understood as ‘uncontrollable’ — and that’s not something anyone can know.”
Of course, the subjects hope to get better, and everything about the setup is nudging them in that direction. So the study becomes a kind of open placebo experiment. Langer has long believed it’s possible to get people to gin up positive effects in their own body — in effect, to decide to get well. Last fall, she tested that proposition, but in reverse: She recruited a number of healthy test subjects and gave them the mission to make themselves unwell. The subjects watched videos of people coughing and sneezing. There were tissues around and those in the experimental group were encouraged to act as if they had a cold. No deception was involved: The subjects weren’t misled, for example, into thinking they were being put into a germ chamber or anything like that. This was explicitly a test to see if they could voluntarily change their immune systems in measurable ways.
In the study, which is ongoing, 40 percent of the experimental group reported cold symptoms following the experiment, while 10 percent of those in control group did. Buoyed, Langer ordered further analysis, looking for more concrete proof that they actually caught colds by testing their saliva for the IgA antibody, a sign of elevated immune-system response. In February, the results came in. All of the experimental subjects who had reported cold symptoms showed high levels of the IgA antibody.
Placebo effects have already been proven to work on the immune system. But this study could show for the first time that they work in a different way — that is, through an act of will. “As far as we know today, the placebo responses in the immune system are attributable to unconscious classical conditioning,” says the Italian neuroscientist Fabrizio Benedetti, a leading expert in placebo effects. In Benedetti’s experiments, a suggestion planted in the minds of test subjects produced physiological changes directly, the way a dinner bell might goose the salivary glands of a dog. (In one study, healthy volunteers given a placebo — a suggestion that any pain they experienced was actually beneficial to their bodies — were found to produce higher levels of natural painkillers.) “There’s no evidence that expectations play a role as well,” Benedetti says. Langer plans to further analyze the subjects’ saliva to see whether they actually have the rhinovirus and not just elevated IgA.
The implications of the open placebo — that is, we know the sugar pill is just a sugar pill, but it still works as medicine — are tantalizing. If placebo effects can be harnessed without deception, it would remove many of the ethical issues that surround placebo work. In a study published in the journal Plos One in 2010, Ted Kaptchuk, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, and his colleagues administered a placebo labeled “placebo” to a test group of patients suffering from irritable bowel syndrome. Their symptoms declined significantly as compared with a no-treatment control group. “At some level everybody realizes they themselves are the placebo,” Langer says.
Continue reading the main story
Langer’s cancer study has had to clear the hurdles of three human-subjects ethics boards — one from Mexico, one from Harvard’s psychology department and, for a time, one from the University of Southern California’s medical school, where until recently Debu Tripathy, an oncologist who is recruiting subjects for Langer’s study, was a professor of medicine. In June, progress stalled when the board at U.S.C. asked that the language be tweaked. “There’s so much stuff that’s totally outrageous in this world,” Langer told me at the time. “They want me to add a consent form for the people to sign saying there’s no known benefit to them. But that just introduces a nocebo effect!” (The study now has to clear the ethics board at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, where Tripathy presently works.)
Like the men in New Hampshire, Langer’s cancer patients in San Miguel will pass a richly diverting week. In this case, art classes, cooking classes and writing classes will help distract them from the brute dread of their circumstances and re-engage them in life. The terror of late-stage cancer can be as debilitating as the physical reality, Tripathy says. Some sufferers, he says, show symptoms akin to PTSD. There’s strong evidence that the support of other people boosts the quality of life for cancer patients. There’s less evidence that it improves their health prospects.
I asked Tripathy whether there’s any precedent for what Langer is trying to do. “Well, there are many examples in medicine where improvement in the emotional state seems also to bring about some improvement in the disease state,” he said. “We know, for example, that Tibetan monks can meditate and lower their blood pressure. People with hypertension, they embark on behavioral changes, and you can see the improvement in the medical indexes, like fewer heart attacks. But cancer? That’s a harder thing to fathom.”
Positive psychology doesn’t have a great track record as a way to fight cancer. Indeed, when James Coyne and colleagues followed 1,093 people with advanced head-and-neck cancer over nine years, they found even the most optimistic subjects lived no longer than the most pessimistic ones.
Some cancer patients respond to interventions better than others, Tripathy notes. “But even with high-dose chemotherapy, you rarely see ‘complete response,’ which is total disappearance” of advanced breast cancer. “So if we saw anything like that, boy, that would hit the medical journals in a hurry.”
One day in Puerto Vallarta in February, Langer sat on the patio of her hillside home. An iguana the length of a celery rib scooted across a high railing, and the dogs went bananas. “That’s Ada,” Langer said. “Or is it Ida? There are two — it’s hard to tell them apart.” When the iguanas first appeared and began devouring the hibiscus, Langer was startled. Now she and Nancy feed them petals for lunch. “That’s the way it is,” she said. “You can be scared. You give it a name, and then it’s a pet.”
Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
Langer peered out over the deep blue sea, in the direction of a lagoon, where early in her career she conducted experiments on whether dolphins were more likely to want to swim with mindful people. In the last few days, she had been exchanging emails with a writer who wanted to come stay with her for a couple of weeks, taking notes for a screenplay for a Hollywood biopic.
Langer told me that she chose San Miguel for her new counterclockwise study primarily because the town had made “an offer I couldn’t refuse.” A group of local businesspeople, convinced of the value of having Langer’s name attached to San Miguel, arranged for lodging to be made available free to Langer. They also encouraged her to build a Langer Mindfulness Institute, which will take part in research and run retreats. (A local developer donated a beautiful casa, next to his Nick Faldo-designed golf course, to serve as staff quarters for the institute.) Starting sometime next year, adults will be able to sign up for a paid, weeklong counterclockwise experience, presumably with a chance at some of the same rejuvenative benefits the New Hampshire test subjects enjoyed.
Langer says she is in conversation with health and business organizations in Australia about establishing another research facility that would also accept paying customers, who will learn to become more mindful through a variety of cognitive-behavioral techniques and exercises. She has already opened a mindfulness institute in Bangalore, India, where researchers are undertaking a study to look at whether mindfulness can stem the spread of prostate cancer.
Langer makes no apologies for the paid retreats, nor for what will be their steep price. (This, too, is calculated: In the absence of other cues, people tend to place disproportionate value on things that cost more. Dan Ariely, a psychologist at Duke, and his colleagues found that pricier placebos were more effective than cheap ones.) To my question of whether such a nakedly commercial venture will undermine her academic credibility, Langer rolled her eyes a bit. “Look, I’m not 40 years old. I’ve paid my dues, and there’s nothing wrong with making this more widely available to people, since I deeply believe it.”
Medical colleagues have asked Langer if she is setting herself up to fail with the cancer study — and perhaps underappreciating the potential setbacks to her work. It’s also possible that subjects who don’t improve could feel more demoralized by the experience. In her memoir, “Bright-sided,” the journalist Barbara Ehrenreich wrote scorchingly about the sunshine brigade that bombarded her with “positive thinking” as she suffered through breast cancer. Under those conditions, patients who don’t get better might feel as if they themselves were somehow to blame.
After a lecture in 2010, in which she’d discussed how when we talk about “fighting” cancer we actually give the disease power, a man buttonholed Langer and laid into her. His wife had died of breast cancer. “He said she had fought it, and I made it seem that it was her fault,” Langer told me.
Langer apologized to the man. “Those are good points, and I’m sorry I didn’t address them,” she said. “But let me explain to you that it’s the culture that teaches us that we have no control. I’m not blaming your wife; I’m blaming the culture.” Langer imagines a day when blame isn’t the first thing people reach for when things go awry. Instead, we will simply bring to bear the power of our own minds — which she believes will turn out to be far greater than we imagined.
Lenders have come under fire in Washington in recent years. Yet one corner of the financial industry — lending to people with poor credit scores — has found sympathetic audiences in many state capitals.
Over the last two years, lawmakers in at least eight states have voted to increase the fees or the interest rates that lenders can charge on certain personal loans used by millions of borrowers with subpar credit.
The overhaul of the state lending laws comes after a lobbying push by the consumer loan industry and a wave of campaign donations to state lawmakers. In North Carolina, for example, lenders and their lobbyists overcame unusually dogged opposition from military commanders, who two years earlier had warned that raising rates on loans could harm their troops.
The lenders argued that interest rate caps had not kept pace with the increased costs of doing business, including running branches and hiring employees. Unless they can make an acceptable profit, the industry says, lenders will not be able to offer loans allowing people with damaged credit to pay for car repairs or medical bills.
But a recent regulatory filing by one of the nation’s largest subprime consumer lenders, Citigroup’s OneMain Financial unit, shows that making personal loans to people on the financial margins can be a highly profitable business — even before state lending laws were changed. Last year, OneMain’s profit increased 31 percent from 2012.
“There was simply no need to change the law,” said Rick Glazier, a North Carolina lawmaker, who opposed the industry’s effort to change the rate structure in his state. “It was one of the most brazen efforts by a special interest group to increase its own profits that I have ever seen.”

Last year, OneMain Financial’s profit increased 31 percent from 2012.
The legislative victories in states including Kentucky, Arizona, Missouri, Indiana and Florida have come at a particularly opportune time for Citigroup, as the bank prepares to sell or spin off OneMain into a separate, publicly traded company.
Another large subprime consumer lender, Springleaf Financial, went public last October, and its shares have increased 78 percent since then.
OneMain is housed in Citi Holdings, where Citigroup keeps troubled assets and business lines that it has been trying to wind down. Subprime consumer lending no longer fits with the bank’s broad strategy focusing on more affluent consumers in big cities.
Still, even as OneMain may be part of the bad bank, it has been a good business in recent years.
OneMain, which has 1.3 million customer accounts, offers its borrowers unsecured, installment loans with interest rates of up to 36 percent. Borrowers pay both interest and principal in monthly installments until the loan is paid off, usually within a few years. But many of its borrowers refinance their outstanding balance.
About 60 percent of OneMain’s loans are so-called renewals — a trend one analyst called “default masking” because borrowers may be able to refinance before they run into trouble paying back their current balance.
In the regulatory filing, OneMain said it re-evaluates the creditworthiness of existing customers before it renews their loans.
“Importantly, our branch employees typically live in the communities they serve,” Mark Costiglio, a Citigroup spokesman, said in a statement. “This face-to-face interaction significantly enhances our value to customers as we work together to assess their household budgets and ability to repay their loans.”
The high rate of renewals by installment lenders was one issue that worried North Carolina’s military officials when the industry lobbied to raise the state’s interest rate structure in 2011.
Commanders from Fort Bragg, home of the Army’s Special Operations Forces, and Camp Lejeune, the Marine base, rarely come out so publicly to denounce a bill, some lawmakers said. But they made an exception for installment loans. One commander worried that “out-of-control debt” could jeopardize soldiers’ security clearances.
The bill, which would allow lenders to make larger installment loans at the highest permissible interest rate, “not only puts our soldiers at risk,” Major General Rodney O. Anderson, an acting senior commander at Fort Bragg, wrote to the North Carolina Senate in June 2011, “it puts our nation’s security at risk.”
In pushing for the changes, the North Carolina Financial Services Association, which represented OneMain and Springleaf, as well as lobbyists for dozens of smaller, locally based lenders, argued that lending caps had not been updated in years. “Rents are higher, electricity costs more, gasoline costs more,” the group’s lobbyist, Richard H. Carlton, said in an interview. “But the rates hadn’t kept pace.”
Faced with strong opposition from the military commanders, the bill died in the legislature.
Nationwide, however, the industry’s lobbying efforts were just getting started, particularly in states with large populations of military service members and borrowers with damaged credit and low incomes.
In Missouri, lawmakers passed a law last year that doubled the allowable origination fees to 10 percent of the loan’s outstanding balance, to a maximum of $75. Indiana and Arizona allowed lenders to extend larger loans at higher rates.
In Maine, a lobbyist for OneMain argued that subprime borrowers in need of loans were better off borrowing from regulated installment lenders than turning to payday firms, which are often outside the reach of most regulators. A Maine lawmaker, who co-sponsored a bill that would allow installment lenders to charge the maximum 30 percent rate on the first $4,000 of a loan, up from $2,000, was impressed by the lender’s low defaults.
“I urge you to visit a OneMain Financial office,” Alan Casavant, who is now the mayor of Biddeford, Me., said in written testimony. The bill eventually failed.
When the installment lenders made another lobbying push in North Carolina last year, their fortunes turned. Newly appointed commanders at the state military institutions seemed more willing to entertain an increase in the interest rate structure.
One general agreed to drop his opposition to the bill if company commanders were required to sign off before their soldiers could obtain a loan. But other generals said their officers lacked the time or expertise to provide financial advice. Brig. Gen. Thomas A. Gorry of the Marine Corps called that requirement “a potentially dangerous” distraction.
In the end, the generals, some of whom were relatively new to their commands at the state’s military bases last year, took “no position” on the bill. Some commanders simply did not want to keep resisting, while others did not feel as strongly opposed as their predecessors, according to people briefed on their thinking.
Another longtime opponent, the Center for Responsible Lending, also dropped its opposition to the bill, after the industry agreed to slightly lower the proposed rate increases at the last minute, said Chris Kukla, the group’s senior vice president. “It was a question of whether we stand on principle or try to alleviate some of the harm,” he said.
Under the previous law, lenders could charge 30 percent interest on loans up to $1,000 and 18 percent on a remaining balance of $6,500. The new law allows for rates of up to 30 percent on the first $4,000 of a loan and 24 percent on the next $4,000.
North Carolina lawmakers, meanwhile, collected hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign donations from the consumer finance industry. Speaker Thom Tillis, who supported the bill in the House, was one of the biggest beneficiaries. Mr. Tillis, a Republican who is running for United States Senate, has received more money from the American Financial Services Association than any other Senate candidate, according to OpenSecrets.org.
Mr. Tillis’s campaign manager, Jordan Shaw, said the donations did not sway his voting record. “He wanted to make sure that people still have these loans as an option,” Mr. Shaw said.
“He also recognized that the risks can drive up the rates.”
Does Job Stability Exist Anymore?
Last year, about this time, my boss IM'd me and my counterpart, her other direct report. “Can you both please call into my conference bridge?"
I dialed in first, and as we were momentarily the only ones on the bridge, she began. “Dan. I’ve been offered another position at another company, and I’m going to take it.”
I didn’t hesitate. There was only one thing to say.
“Can I go, too?”
She laughed. In retrospect, I probably came off a bit desperate.
Later that day, I thought about that conversation. When I first joined that particular company, I interviewed with no less than 6 different people. By the time the interview process finished, I was wondering if there was anyone in the company I hadn’t met. It had been 18 months, and I realized that she was the last of those original 6 still at the company. That had to mean something, and every way I looked at it, it wasn’t a good indicator.
When it’s time to move on from something in life, you just know. Plenty of people know how to ignore that feeling, but I’m not one of them. Sometimes, when you’re thinking things are secure – BAM! – something happens. Your boss leaves. Your pay structure changes. Your team gets shifted to another department. You wonder if security is an illusion.
Security IS an illusion.
It doesn’t matter who you are. A CEO, making $50 million dollars a year still has to worry every day that the shareholders may call for their resignation if growth doesn't meet the expected projections. A maintenance worker still has to worry that their position does not become outsourced to a 3rd party company, hiring contractors willing to do the same job for less money and no health benefits.
What perpetuates the a fore mentioned security illusion is that antiquated ideal of the “American Dream”. Get a “stable” job. Get a house with a 30 year mortgage. By the time you are ready to retire, the house will be paid off and you can live out the rest of your days in peace. It sounds so great in theory and looks even better on paper, but if your job situation changes, or the economy changes, and you can’t make that mortgage payment – then what?
My plan is different. My plan is a rollercoaster; you will ride it when you could be with your friends, because of the rush it gives; the highs and the lows. You'll be supported by the “stability” of the job you already have, and you'll use that stability for whatever it is worth.
Here are the steps you have to take:
1. Start thinking about what you know more about than MOST people. It could be beer. It could be art. Comics. Real Estate. Working Out. Computers. Cooking. Instagram. The Hunger Games. Fishing. Photoshop. Snowboarding. It could be anything. Whatever you know about.
2. Start thinking about how you can teach people who don’t know about your topic, but want to learn. People often try things one time then give up because they weren’t good at it. I hear people say all the time, “I tried but I wasn’t that good so I got frustrated and gave up.” If you look, you could find tons of skiis, rollerblades, art supplies, and much more in people’s closets. Our expectation is always to be amazing at something the first time we try it, but it doesn’t work that way. Your goal is to help those people realize that with your coaching and their hard work, they could learn enough to enjoy it.
3. IGNORE the voices that tell you “someone has already done this!” and “You don’t know enough!” Those voices are useless. You’ll come up with reasons why you shouldn’t go down this road. Tons of them. Your brain will invent new ones after your conquered the old ones. I can’t shut off my brain from coming up with more. I get angry about that and then my wife tells me "you need to change your attitude or go back to bed."
Get used to having these voices and ignoring them.
4. Start teaching what you know. Give it away for free to your earliest learners. That’s OK, because you’re living off the money from your current job; remember the "security"? 
This is your chance to hone your craft. You have to find the best way to teach people. Is it a YouTube channel? Is it an in-person class? Is it a Google Hangout session? Is it one-on-one coaching? 
If you can connect with people, make them feel truly important and valuable, then it doesn't matter if you’re teaching them in a group or one at a time.
5. Keep teaching. Start charging just a little. Some of the earliest learners who were receiving it for free will drop off. This is not rejection, it's OK. Some people always just want things for free. 
I’m can relate to those people, so I know. But I do pay for things that are valuable to me, and especially if I feel that the person I’m paying is personally invested in seeing me succeed. 
If they've seen my struggle, know where I’m stuck, and want to help me move past that, then I’m going to happily pay them for that help; but it has to be personal.
6. Keep teaching. Start charging a bit more, and figure better ways to express the value you’re offering. More of those earliest learners will drop off. This is not rejection, it's OK. They will be replaced by new people who want to learn what you’re teaching and because you've helped a number of people by this point, and the newbies have heard such good things, they’ll view you as an expert.
7. Charge more. You've been doing this long enough that you can command a higher rate, and you deserve it. For the people I've worked with so far, one common problem I see across the board is them not charging enough. They don't feel confident enough to consider themselves as the best at what they do, so they feel uncomfortable asking higher prices. Throughout our lives, we constantly see examples of people charging different rates for the same thing, but when it comes to our work, we have the tendency to devalue ourselves. People are willing to pay more for an Mac then a PC, even though they’re both computers that do the same thing. Why is that? It's simple. They identify with Apple's mindset, "Think Different". People buy from people who believe what they believe. By this point, you'll have a dedicated group of people who have followed you because they like what you believe, and hang on your every word. As a result of all the hard work you put in with the earlier steps, you'll never have to sell them on why they should pay more to work with you. They'll already have seen the value you provide multiple times over.
BONUS STEP:
8. Offer to teach people how to make money teaching others about THEIR topic. 
This is when it gets crazy. 
People will approach you and ask you for help with their own topic. You’ll know what works and what doesn't. You’ll charge them to teach them what you know about marketing and getting clients, even if you know nothing about their topic. It’ll be completely different from what you've done before, yet familiar at the same time.
It’s not a plan that will be effortless. It’s a plan that requires prioritization. It’s not a plan that will reach completion within a week.
But when you need a guide, I am here. Here's who I am, and what I do.
3 Money Mistakes You Must Fix to Get Rich
I get a lot of questions about how to get rich, and I always give the same answer.
Don’t spend too much. Mostly save. Always invest.
Seems simple enough, right? Yet so many people do the exact opposite—invest poorly, spend way too much, save almost nothing, and remain willfully ignorant about their finances.
Why? Because they don’t understand their relationship to money.
The first step in changing money habits is taking a cold hard look at your financial input and output. Here’s what you need to do: boil your money matters down to one simple number by adding up all your earnings and subtracting all your expenditures over three months. I call this your 90-day number.
Once you write that 90-day number down you’ll be faced with one of two truths.
Your number is positive. Congratulations, you’re one of the few people taking in more money than you spend!
Your number is in the negatives, and like the majority of men and women, you spend more than you make.
The good news is that no matter what your 90-day number teaches you about your relationship with money, there’s always room to improve. I’m going to help you do exactly that by pointing out 3 money mistakes everybody makes at some point in their lives, and teaching you how to fix them.
Money Mistake #1: You’re drowning in credit debt.
The Fix: READ THE FINE PRINT
Spending too much is a disease, and credit card debt is a cancer. The first time you get a credit card bill and don’t pay off the full balance, you’ve let the first financial cancer cell into your life.
Next time you get a credit card bill in the mail, put your glasses on and take a good, hard look at the fine print.
Credit card companies are required by law to tell you how many years it will take you to pay off your balance if you pay the minimum each month. In most instances, this number is a monstrous thing to behold.
With typical compound interest rates averaging around 16%, this black hole of debt keeps growing, and growing, and growing.
Once you take a look at the fine print, you MUST start dedicating every spare penny you have to paying off your credit. If you want to get rich, you need to eliminate your debt first.
Money Mistake #2: Spending makes you happy
The Fix: GET A HANDLE ON EMOTIONAL SPENDING
Most men and women who spend too much do so because it feels good, temporarily. But as I always say, mixing money with emotions is a toxic combination.
Don’t go shopping to change your mood. It might make you feel better in the short term, but I promise: the long-term fulfillment of saving and growing your money far outweighs the temporary satisfaction of retail therapy.
Recognize when you’re about to spend with your emotions, and go for a walk, cook, or read instead. Do anything; just don’t head for the mall!
Money Mistake #3: Frugality isn’t fun
The Fix: CREATE A “FUN MONEY” FUND
Many people who commit themselves 100% to eliminating debt and saving money find that a certain joylessness creeps in after a while. The same thing happens to dieters who deprive themselves of all their favorite foods for months, and then cave to late-night binges.
That’s not a way to live, and that’s not what I advocate. Austerity, yes; deprivation, no.
The key is to include spending on fun things in your budget. Set aside a manageable percentage every week in a fund that will let you splurge with cash. Go out for lunch, get your hair done, or use your fun money to go on a vacation—do whatever you want, as long as you pay for it outright. This way you can enjoy your splurges without feeling guilty!
A Call for Crazy Ideas
This month, Melinda and I joined hundreds of scientists for a meeting in Seattle. The topic we discussed is something we’re all passionate about: how to harness the advances of science in ways that benefit the poor.
The occasion is the 10th anniversary of our foundation’s Grand Challenges in Global Health program, which we launched with the goal of identifying the biggest problems in health and giving grants to researchers who might solve them. To be honest, we’re not as far along as I hoped a decade ago; the process of developing and perfecting new tools—going from proof-of-concept through clinical trials, regulatory approval, manufacturing, and distribution—is even slower and harder than I thought. But we've learned a lot, and we've made some promising progress.
Grand Challenges has its roots in what I call catalytic philanthropy. It’s designed to fix market failures—places where capitalism fails to meet the needs of the poor. Why is there so much more research done on baldness than on malaria? Because rich people go bald, and they don’t die of malaria. Grand Challenges is like a venture capital fund in the sense that it backs a lot of ideas, knowing that many will fail, but a few could have a big impact. I’ll be delighted if five years from now, 20 percent of the initial projects are being deployed and saving lives.
The Grand Challenges run the gamut from making staple crops more nutritious to creating vaccines that won’t spoil when they get warm. The Wolbachia project that I wrote about in April—trying to stop dengue fever by infecting mosquitoes with a particular bacterium—also came out of a Grand Challenge.
We've made short videos about two other examples: an effort to identify HIV at the moment of infection…
…and one to fight malaria by overloading the mosquito’s sense of smell (“like getting on an elevator with someone who’s put on way too much perfume,” as researcher Laurence Zwiebel puts it):
There’s another Grand Challenge that illustrates both what’s exciting and what’s hard about catalytic philanthropy: making the diagnosis of disease faster and more accurate.
Health clinics in many poor countries don’t have the same kind of sophisticated tools for diagnosing disease that many of us take for granted. If they do have access, it’s often a laborious process that involves mailing samples to a faraway lab and waiting for the results. The result: missed or delayed diagnoses and incorrect treatment plans. The evidence suggests that this problem has tragic consequences; in Tanzania and Nigeria, for example, studies found that misdiagnosis causes 25 percent of preventable deaths in children.
Imagine what would happen if American children were dying at that rate. The health-care market would spring into action, as dozens of companies went to work on new diagnostic tools. Yet because this was a problem of the poor world, companies were ignoring it. The market was failing.
So we challenged researchers: Can you create a new device that quickly diagnoses HIV, TB, malaria, and other diseases… accepts different samples, like blood, saliva, and sputum… is affordable… and reliable… and will work in a small clinic that has only a few hours of electricity a day?
Today, five public-private partnerships have taken up the challenge. The journey from idea to reality is a long one. For one thing, the partners had to figure out whether making such a machine was even technically feasible. It is—several of them have working prototypes. This is one of them, the Stratos, which our foundation is developing with a Seattle-based medical engineering company:
The groups also had to find commercial partners—companies that design and build diagnostic devices—that would help bear the cost of developing and delivering a new tool.
Today we know that it’s technically possible to build a device and that there are partners ready to help. But there are other questions that we can’t answer yet. For example, we don’t fully understand the magnitude of the problem and haven’t quantified the impact of solving it. How much does it help to diagnose a disease if the patient can’t be treated right away? Can a new diagnostic tool be made cheaply enough for poor countries? Will it provide enough of a health benefit to justify R&D costs that could run in the hundreds of millions of dollars? We’re studying these questions now and expect to have an answer by the middle of next year.
This is a fact of life in catalytic philanthropy. Experts identify a problem and start the long, difficult journey of solving it. Even after you get something built—and it looks pretty promising—there may not be a cost-effective way to get it to the people who really need it.
If this idea succeeds, that will be fantastic. If it doesn't, we’ll all be disappointed. But, as Thomas Edison famously said, “I have not failed 10,000 times. I've successfully found 10,000 ways that will not work.” That spirit guides our foundation’s work in Grand Challenges and all our grantmaking. If one avenue turns out to be a dead end, there are always many more waiting to be explored.
World Series 2014: Giants and Madison Bumgarner Upstage Royals
Giants starter Madison Bumgarner threw in time to catch a runner at first. Bumgarner held the Royals to three hits and a run in seven innings.
It took nine games and a masterful pitching performance by Madison Bumgarner, but someone finally found a method for beating the Kansas City Royals this postseason. The Royals had rampaged their way through the early and middle rounds by winning their first eight games, and came into the World Series on a seemingly irrepressible tide of momentum.
But so, too, did the Giants, who lost only two games on their way to joining the Royals in a battle of wild-card entries. It has been viewed as a matchup of teams that lay claim a path to destiny. That has yet to be decided, but the first salvo went to the Giants, who rode Bumgarner’s splendid effort and pounded James Shields to a 7-1 win in Game 1, one of this postseason’s only blowouts.
The Giants’ Madison Bumgarner will start Game 1 of the World Series on Tuesday.
Salvador Perez is quick with a smile and a laugh. And with the Royals, he is quick to capture it all by filming team videos.
Lorenzo Cain had 28 stolen bases this season as the Royals led the majors with 153.
On San Francisco's side, clockwise from top left: third baseman Pablo Sandoval; Matt Duffy’s bat knob, featuring a tribute to “The Simpsons”; right fielder Hunter Pence; the mascot Lou Seal with Joe Montana; the ace Madison Bumgarner; and catcher Buster Posey.
Bumgarner was almost flawless over seven innings, allowing only one run and three hits and striking out five as he continued to save his best pitching for the game’s grandest stage. The Royals had not lost since Sept. 27, and their undefeated streak in the postseason actually extended 11 games, including the 1985 World Series.
Hunter Pence hit a two-run homer in the first inning to give the Giants a 3-0 lead. Credit Rob Carr/Getty Images
“The only difference,” said Shields, “is that we faced a great pitcher.”
Worse, for the Royals, if the Series extends beyond four games, they will most likely have to contend again with Bumgarner, a 25-year-old left-hander who has yet to lose in three World Series appearances.
Covering starts in 2010 and 2012 and on Tuesday, Bumgarner accumulated a stretch of 212/3 straight scoreless innings over his first three World Series games. The only other pitcher to throw more consecutive scoreless innings to begin a World Series career was another Giant, Christy Mathewson, who tossed 28 consecutive scoreless innings, including three shutouts against the Philadelphia Athletics in the 1905 World Series.
With his almost casual crossfire delivery to right-handed hitters, Bumgarner threw eight shutout innings in his only World Series start in 2010, then threw seven more in his one start in the 2012 World Series. The Giants won both those series and are seeking to continue the trend of winning the title every other year, while the Royals seek to win the World Series in their first appearance in the postseason since 1985, when they won their only championship.
James Shields, the Royals' ace, was pulled in the fourth inning. Credit Rob Carr/Getty Images
While Shields had not pitched in 11 days, Bumgarner was on his normal turn, having pitched the clinching Game 5 of the National League Championship Series on Thursday. While most everyone else on the field was trying to overcome the effects of a lengthy layoff — five days for the Royals, four for the Giants — Bumgarner was synchronized to succeed.
“This is a big stage, a loud crowd,” Giants Manager Bruce Bochy said. “But he just keeps that maniacal focus. He’s as good as anybody I’ve seen at it.”
The only World Series run Bumgarner has ever allowed came in his final inning Tuesday, when Salvador Perez homered with two outs in the seventh. The Royals managed a single in the second inning by Billy Butler and a double by Mike Moustakas in the third, when Kansas City failed to score after getting runners to second and third with nobody out. Omar Infante reached on an error by shortstop Brandon Crawford and held at third when Moustakas doubled down the right-field line.
Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
The announced crowd of 40,459, with most of the fans wearing Royal blue, was loud and relentless for much of the game, and it came to life at that critical moment. Bumgarner never flinched.
Royals right fielder Nori Aoki could not handle a ball off the bat of Joe Panik in the seventh. Panik ended up at third and scored soon afterward. Credit John G. Mabanglo/European Pressphoto Agency
“If you’re worried about how loud the crowd is going to be, then you’re in the wrong place mentally and probably the wrong business,” Bumgarner said. “But it makes it a lot easier the fact that every single game we play at home is like this or louder. It’s like that every day for us.”
With the din unable to penetrate his concentration, Bumgarner struck out Alcides Escobar and Nori Aoki, who had struck out only once in 27 postseason at-bats coming into the game. Bumgarner then pitched very carefully to Lorenzo Cain, the No. 3 hitter, with first base open. Cain came into the Series batting .353 with three doubles and four runs batted in, so Bumgarner did not give in. He walked Cain, but then got the left-handed-hitting Eric Hosmer to ground out with most of the fans standing and howling.
“That’s one of my favorite things to be able to do in baseball,” Bumgarner said, “is to work through a situation like that one.”
With Bumgarner on the mound, the Royals seemed to revert to the team they were in the regular season, when they hit only 95 home runs, not the power-charged team of the postseason. The Royals had smashed eight home runs this month. Speed has been another weapon for the Royals, but as they were unable to reach base against Bumgarner for most of the night, that method of attack was muted, while the Giants were merciless against Shields.
Salvador Perez tagging out Buster Posey as he tried to score on a double by Pablo Sandoval in the first inning.
Shields, whose nickname while he was in Tampa Bay was Big Game James, gave up three runs in the first inning, the last two on a home run by Hunter Pence. Shields allowed five runs over all in only three innings, being removed after facing three batters in the fourth and not recording an out. Shields came into the game with a 5.63 earned run average in three starts this postseason, and his career postseason record, despite his nickname, dropped to 3-5 with a 5.74 E.R.A.
The game did not begin auspiciously for Shields, as Pablo Sandoval pulled a double into the right-field corner, scoring Gregor Blanco in the first inning, followed soon after by Pence’s two-run homer. Shields had not pitched since Game 1 of the American League Championship Series on Oct. 10, and the inactivity may have contributed to his lack of feel on his pitches, although he denied it.
“No, I felt good,” he said. “I threw a couple of bullpens in between. It just wasn’t my night tonight.”
Shields appeared to reassert control after a single to Brandon Belt and retired seven in a row. But in the top of the fourth, the problems returned.
Pence doubled down the left-field line, and Belt walked and went to third when Shields threw a wild pitch. When Michael Morse singled to center, Pence went home to make it 4-0, and Shields went to the dugout, his evening of work done.
There were no such problems for Bumgarner, whose postseason earned run average coming into the game was 2.67 in 11 appearances. He was not an unknown commodity to the Royals, who faced him here on Aug. 8, and beat him, 4-2. But when it comes to the World Series, Bumgarner is on another plateau, and so the Giants, not the Royals, are undefeated in the 2014 World Series.
“It’s been nothing but energy and love this whole postseason,” Hosmer said. “Obviously, it’s not the way you want to start the World Series. But there is still a long way to go.”
Ruthless Bayern Munich scored five goals in the first 35 minutes on the way to a 7-1 demolition of AS Roma on Tuesday which bore an uncanny resemblance to Germany's win over Brazil by the same score in the World Cup semi-final.
Just as Germany did in Belo Horizonte three months ago, Bayern enjoyed a scarcely believable spell midway through the first half when their opponents' defence imploded and every attack resulted in a goal.
Roma's coaching staff, substitutes and supporters looked on in stunned amazement as Bayern ripped through their shell-shocked defence, scoring four goals between the 23rd and 35th minutes on their way to their record European away win.
With their 38-year-old talismanic forward Francesco Totti performing a disappearing act, the hosts had no answer to Bayern's relentless pressing and struggled to get the ball out of their own half, with every mistake starting off another surgical Bayern attack.
Bayern's side included four players from the Belo Horizonte match which also ended 7-1 - Manuel Neuer, Philipp Lahm, Thomas Mueller and Jerome Boateng.
Arjen Robben scored twice, while Mario Goetze, Robert Lewandowski and Mueller, from a penalty, also chipped in before halftime and substitutes Franck Ribery and Xherdan Shaqiri completed the rout after the break.
Gervinho provided Roma's consolation and prevented Bayern keeping a clean sheet for the ninth match in a row in all competitions.
Roma, who had never conceded more than three goals in a home European game before, equalled their heaviest-ever European defeat, a 7-1 loss to Manchester United.
"It was a technical collapse, not a mental one," said Roma coach Rudi Garcia, whose last match against Bayern ended in a 6-1 rout when he was coach of French club Lille two seasons ago.
"The first person to make a mistake was myself. I got the strategy wrong. In the second half, we showed some pride and would of scored more goals if it hadn't been for their goalkeeper."
"I'm upset for our fans," added midfielder Daniele De Rossi, whose side must visit Bayern in two weeks' time. "The city had waited so long for this game."
Robben opened the floodgates in the ninth minute when he collected the ball on the edge of the area, jinked inside Ashley Cole and effortlessly curled his shot past Morgan De Sanctis.
It was ominously simple for the Dutchman and suggested Roma were in for a long night.
Bayern goalkeeper Manuel Neuer stopped Gervinho's shot two minutes later, preventing a goal which could have dramatically changed the course of the game, and from then on it was all Bayern.
The second came in the 23rd minute when Bayern dispossessed Roma in their own half and the move ended with Goetze exchanging passes with Mueller and wrong-footing De Sanctis from the edge of the area, again with embarrassing ease.
Two minutes later, an unmarked Lewandowski headed in Juan Bernat's cross from six metres after Bayern again won possession.
The move for the fourth goal started inside Bayern's own half and ended with Lewandowski's pass sending Robben clear of Cole to fire past De Santcis on the half hour as Garcia looked on bemused from the bench.
Mueller, looking too embarrassed to celebrate, converted a penalty after handball by Kostas Manolas five minutes after that and Roma summed up their first half when they lost possession immediately from the re-start
Roma were less submissive after halftime and Gervinho, having hit the post and been denied again by Neuer, finally headed one back in the 66th minute.
But Bayern's substitutes were determined to get in on the act and Ribery, having just come on, ran on to Robben's through ball and chipped De Sanctis.
Shaqiri completed the scoring after Bayern had again won possession in the Roma half.
After Ruling in O’Bannon Case, Determining the Future of Amateur Athletics
During the question-and-answer portion of a speech at a downtown restaurant here Monday afternoon, Mark Emmert, the president of the N.C.A.A., was asked about amateurism. Why did the N.C.A.A. still have rules barring payments to athletes, an audience member wanted to know, given that other students can work as, say, interns and research assistants and earn money for their skills?
Emmert said there were moral and practical implications involved in paying college athletes. The functional reason, he said, is to keep recruiting on a level playing field, and he then explained why players could not be paid for signed merchandise.
“Do you sell autographs to School X because they’ve guaranteed you $100,000 and School Y’s guaranteeing $250,000?” Emmert asked. “How does that model work?”
Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A.'s president, testifying before a Senate committee this month. Emmert generally defended the organization's current model but acknowledged several of the senators' concerns.N.C.A.A. Players’ Winning Streak, Off the FieldJULY 23, 2014
Sam Keller in 2007 while a quarterback at Nebraska.N.C.A.A. Settles One Video Game Suit for $20 Million as a Second BeginsJUNE 9, 2014
Since Mark Emmert took the helm of the N.C.A.A. in 2010, the organization has faced a relentless barrage of criticism.Face of the N.C.A.A., Battered Early and OftenJUNE 8, 2014
It has been more than two months since a federal judge dealt a blow to the National Collegiate Athletic Association’s long-held amateurism ideal, ruling that N.C.A.A. rules preventing athletes from profiting from their likenesses on television and in video games violated antitrust laws. The decision, scheduled to take effect next Aug. 1, has been appealed by the N.C.A.A.
Still, universities and conferences around the country continue to scramble to increase benefits for players, including giving them more money as part of their scholarships. And the N.C.A.A.’s response to United States District Judge Claudia Wilken’s decision has been instructive, both on the complicated nature of amateurism and the N.C.A.A.’s position of supporting some benefits, but not others, while maintaining intellectual and legal consistency.
Wilken’s ruling in the O’Bannon case — named for the lead plaintiff, the former U.C.L.A. basketball player Ed O’Bannon — does not mandate that players be paid, but she suggested that colleges could share profits by raising the value of the scholarship to cover the full cost of attendance, as well as paying players through trust funds that could be tapped after college. Wilken recommended that the N.C.A.A. could cap the payments at $5,000 per player per year, and it would not violate antitrust laws.
Emmert supports increasing the value of scholarships. The Big Ten, Pacific-12 and Atlantic Coast conferences have endorsed it, too, as part of their platforms for the new autonomy the five wealthiest conferences were recently given to make some of their own rules (the Southeastern and the Big 12 conferences are the other two). But, Emmert said, the N.C.A.A. is opposed to the trust funds.
William Isaacson, one of O’Bannon’s lawyers, said this was the trouble with the N.C.A.A.’s definition of amateurism. He noted that several of the N.C.A.A.’s own witnesses from last summer’s trial were not certain how much money separated an amateur college athlete from a paid professional.
“Their definition changes,” Isaacson said, adding, “They agree with so much of the ruling, you sometimes wonder why they’re appealing.”
The N.C.A.A. also cited Wilken’s ruling in an attempt to have another series of lawsuits dismissed. The highest-profile of those cases was brought by the lawyer Jeffrey Kessler on behalf of the former Clemson defensive back Martin Jenkins, among others, and seeks to essentially turn recruits into free agents. Emmert said the case would “blow up college sports.”
Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
Donald Remy, the N.C.A.A.’s chief legal officer, said a key to Wilken’s decision was the cap on the trust funds, an acknowledgment of the right to restrain athletes’ benefits.
“If we implemented Judge Wilken’s injunction, along with the restraints, exactly as she described it in the O’Bannon decision,” Remy said, “then under the theories in the Jenkins case, that would be an antitrust violation. And that cannot be what she intended.”
Joe McNally 11 hours ago
Moral and practical implications? Oh, but there's none of those when it comes to paying you a very sizable salary? And paying college...
Doug 14 hours ago
Why shouldn't a student be allowed to make a commercial or sign autographs on their own time and earn compensation? Maybe it hurts the...
michjas 14 hours ago
It is unreasonable to view the ballplayers' scholarship stipends as payment for their services. Most of the players, like most students,...
In its appeal of the O’Bannon case, the N.C.A.A. has asked the appellate court to re-examine its assertion that amateurism, by the N.C.A.A.’s definition, is vital to its business model. Another argument the organization will make is that players do not have publicity rights and, therefore, cannot be paid for them. The N.C.A.A.’s appellate brief is due in November; the O’Bannon team’s response is due in January. Oral arguments could follow as soon as April, and both sides have requested an expedited decision before the injunction takes effect.
As the O’Bannon case winds its way through the courts, athletic directors and university presidents are also wrestling with Wilken’s ruling. The 65 universities that were granted greater autonomy are expected to vote to increase the value of scholarships at the N.C.A.A. convention in January, which will shed light on how the O’Bannon decision could be affected by Title IX, the statute intended to end sex discrimination in education programs, including athletics, that receive federal financial assistance.
Currently, conferences and universities are looking at four options. The increased scholarships could apply only to the 13 men’s basketball players and 85 football players on scholarship, or to a matching number of women (98 across a number of sports). More expensive options being debated include offering the scholarship increase to all athletes who are receiving a full scholarship. If the O’Bannon ruling takes effect and universities choose to establish trust funds, the same Title IX parameters could apply.
Remy said some conferences could arrive at different conclusions, but he maintained confidence that all universities would be compliant.
North Carolina State’s athletic director, Debbie Yow, was less certain.
“We still have more questions than answers,” she said. “The January convention is going to be historic.”